README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="app/public/logo-light.svg">
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="app/public/logo-dark.svg">
    <img alt="Trove" src="app/public/logo-dark.svg" width="340">
  </picture>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>Trustless escrow for freelancers. Zero commission. Zero risk. Built on Alephium.</strong>
</p>

1.57 billion freelancers worldwide. Most have no contract, no protection, no recourse. Just blind trust.

The alternatives? Platforms like Upwork take 10–20% on every gig — that's $5,000–$10,000/year gone for a freelancer billing $50k. Or you go direct: you deliver, you invoice, you wait. And wait. The client ghosts. Your 80 hours of work? A gift.

Too expensive, or too risky. There's nothing in between.

**Trove is the in-between.** A smart contract locks both parties' money. The code releases it when the work is done. No middleman. No commission. No trust required.

---

## How It Works

```
Client                        Freelancer                      Arbiter
  |                              |                               |
  |── create escrow ──────────>  |                               |
  |   (locks 1000 ALPH)         |                               |
  |                              |                               |
  |                              |── accept + deposit bond ───>  |
  |                              |   (100 ALPH collateral)       |
  |                              |                               |
  |                              |── deliver(IPFS link) ──────>  |
  |                              |                               |
  |── release() ──────────────>  |                               |
  |   1100 ALPH → freelancer     |                               |
  |   (atomic, single tx)        |                               |
  |                              |                               |
  |   Trust score +5             |                               |
  |   Next bond reduced          |                               |
```

The client deposits payment. The freelancer deposits a bond. Both are locked in a smart contract that **neither party controls**. When the client validates the work, everything is released in a **single atomic transaction** — payment + bond go to the freelancer. One click. One transaction. Zero risk of partial execution.

If there's a dispute, an on-chain arbiter reviews the evidence (specs, deliverables, messages — all stored on IPFS) and redistributes funds by percentage. Every decision is recorded on-chain. Transparent. Immutable. Auditable.

**No scenario leaves anyone stuck:**

| Situation | What happens |
|-----------|-------------|
| Client validates | Freelancer gets payment + bond. Score +5. |
| Client disappears | Auto-claim after 48h past deadline. Freelancer gets everything. |
| Client cancels early | Full refund before freelancer accepts. No penalty. |
| Freelancer abandons | Client refunded. Freelancer gets bond back. Score -3. |
| Dispute | Arbiter splits funds 0–100% with on-chain justification. |

---

## On-chain Reputation

Today, to be credible as a freelancer, you give 15% of your income to a platform. On Trove, **you build your own credibility. And nobody can take it away.**

The TrustRegistry contract stores every freelancer's trust score on-chain (0–100, starting at 50). The bond decreases as the score increases:

| Score | Bond | What it means |
|-------|------|---------------|
| 50 (new) | 50% of base | First gig. Unknown track record. |
| 70 | 30% | Proven. Several successful deliveries. |
| 90+ | 10% (floor) | Veteran. Minimal bond, maximum trust. |

Formula: `bond = baseCollateral * max(10, 100 - score) / 100`

A new freelancer deposits a full bond. After 5 missions, it drops. After 20, it's almost symbolic. They didn't send a resume. They didn't beg a platform to verify them. They just did the work — and the blockchain remembered.

---

## Why Alephium

We didn't pick Alephium by accident.

| | Ethereum | Alephium |
|---|---|---|
| **Model** | Account-based. All contracts share global state. | **sUTXO**. Each escrow is an isolated UTXO with its own state. |
| **Isolation** | One bug can contaminate other contracts. Like all bank vaults sharing one lock. | Each vault has its own lock, its own key. Mathematically isolated. |
| **Atomicity** | Multi-step transactions. Intermediate states. Race conditions. | Multiple inputs → one output → one transaction. **All or nothing.** |
| **Security** | Reentrancy. Unlimited token approvals. Flashloans. | **Impossible by design.** The Asset Permission System eliminates these attack vectors at the VM level. |
| **Energy** | PoW / PoS | Proof of Less Work. **87% less energy** than classic PoW. |

Alephium's sUTXO model lets us build **Smart-UTXOs** — assets that carry their own release conditions. The escrow contract IS the vault. Not a pointer to a balance in a global ledger. The actual funds, locked, with code that defines exactly when and how they move.

This is the level of security that freelancers deserve.

---

## Architecture

### Smart Contracts (Ralph)

**`TrustRegistry`** — Persistent on-chain reputation. One instance, stores all scores.

**`Escrow`** — One per mission. 13 fields, 8 functions, full dispute lifecycle.

```
Created ──> Active ──> Delivered ──> Done (release / autoClaim)
   |           |  |         |
   |           |  |         └──> Dispute ──> Done (resolve)
   |           |  |
   |           |  └──> Done (refundByFreelancer)
   |           |
   |           └──> Dispute ──> Done (resolve)
   |
   └──> Done (cancelByClient)
```

**9 TxScripts** — Alephium's native transaction scripts for frontend interaction:
`AcceptAndDeposit` · `Deliver` · `ReleasePayment` · `OpenDispute` · `SubmitEvidence` · `ResolveDispute` · `RefundByFreelancer` · `CancelEscrow` · `ClaimAfterDeadline`

### Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|-------|------------|
| Blockchain | Alephium (sUTXO, Proof of Less Work) |
| Smart contracts | Ralph (.ral) |
| Frontend | Next.js 14 · React 18 · TypeScript |
| Wallet | Alephium Extension (@alephium/web3-react) |
| Specs storage | IPFS via Pinata |
| SDK | @alephium/web3 · @alephium/cli |
| Tests | Jest · @alephium/web3-test |
| Infra | Docker Compose (node + explorer + PostgreSQL) |

### Monorepo

```
trove/
├── contracts/            # Ralph contracts + deploy scripts + tests
│   ├── contracts/        # escrow.ral · trust_registry.ral · escrow_scripts.ral
│   ├── scripts/          # Deploy scripts (TrustRegistry, then Escrow)
│   ├── test/             # Unit tests
│   └── artifacts/        # Auto-generated TypeScript bindings
├── app/                  # Next.js frontend
│   ├── src/components/   # CreateEscrow · ContractView · ArbitrationView
│   └── src/utils/        # Alephium web3 integration
├── alephium-stack/       # Docker Compose for local devnet
└── docs/                 # Technical documentation
```

---

## Run It

### Prerequisites

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) >= 18
- [Yarn](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/) v1 (`npm install -g yarn`)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) + Docker Compose

### One command

```bash
git clone <repo-url> && cd HackatonDeauphine
yarn install
yarn go
```

`yarn go` starts the Docker devnet, compiles Ralph contracts, deploys them, builds TypeScript bindings, and launches the frontend. Everything.

**http://localhost:3000** — you're live.

### Testnet

```bash
export PRIVATE_KEYS="your_private_key"
yarn go:testnet
```

Free tokens: [Alephium Faucet](https://faucet.testnet.alephium.org/)

### Commands

| Command | What it does |
|---------|-------------|
| `yarn go` | Full stack: devnet + compile + deploy + build + frontend |
| `yarn go:testnet` | Same, but deploys to testnet |
| `yarn dev:testnet` | Frontend on testnet (contracts already deployed) |
| `yarn devnet:start` | Start Docker devnet |
| `yarn devnet:stop` | Stop Docker devnet |
| `yarn compile` | Compile Ralph → artifacts |
| `yarn deploy` | Deploy contracts to devnet |
| `yarn build:contracts` | Build TypeScript bindings |
| `yarn test` | Run unit tests |
| `yarn dev` | Start frontend (port 3000) |

### Devnet services

| Service | URL |
|---------|-----|
| Alephium Node | http://127.0.0.1:22973 |
| API Docs | http://127.0.0.1:22973/docs |
| Block Explorer | http://localhost:23000 |

### Devnet wallet

Import into [Alephium Extension](https://alephium.org/#wallets) (custom network `http://127.0.0.1:22973`):

```
vault alarm sad mass witness property virus style good flower rice alpha viable evidence run glare pretty scout evil judge enroll refuse another lava
```

4 addresses, **4,000,000 ALPH** each.

---

## Troubleshooting

| Problem | Fix |
|---------|-----|
| `ENOENT` on artifacts | `rm contracts/.project.json && yarn compile` |
| `Can't resolve 'my-contracts'` | `yarn build:contracts && yarn install` |
| Deploy fails (connection) | `yarn devnet:start` |
| Empty addresses in frontend | `yarn setup && yarn dev` |
| Port already in use | `yarn devnet:stop` |

---

## Docs

- [**Contract API**](docs/CONTRACTS_API.md) — Every function, every parameter, every check
- [**Frontend Guide**](docs/FRONTEND_GUIDE.md) — How to talk to the contracts from React
- [**Alephium Onboarding**](docs/ALEPHIUM-TECHNICAL-ONBOARDING.md) — Ralph language & sUTXO model
- [**Implementation Plan**](PLAN.md) — Design decisions & architecture rationale

---

## License

MIT

Commit message:

docs(README): update setup instructions and add note on .env.example for clarity

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="app/public/logo-light.svg">
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="app/public/logo-dark.svg">
    <img alt="Trove" src="app/public/logo-dark.svg" width="340">
  </picture>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>Trustless escrow for freelancers. Zero commission. Zero risk. Built on Alephium.</strong>
</p>

1.57 billion freelancers worldwide. Most have no contract, no protection, no recourse. Just blind trust.

The alternatives? Platforms like Upwork take 10–20% on every gig — that's $5,000–$10,000/year gone for a freelancer billing $50k. Or you go direct: you deliver, you invoice, you wait. And wait. The client ghosts. Your 80 hours of work? A gift.

Too expensive, or too risky. There's nothing in between.

**Trove is the in-between.** A smart contract locks both parties' money. The code releases it when the work is done. No middleman. No commission. No trust required.

---

## How It Works

```
Client                        Freelancer                      Arbiter
  |                              |                               |
  |── create escrow ──────────>  |                               |
  |   (locks 1000 ALPH)         |                               |
  |                              |                               |
  |                              |── accept + deposit bond ───>  |
  |                              |   (100 ALPH collateral)       |
  |                              |                               |
  |                              |── deliver(IPFS link) ──────>  |
  |                              |                               |
  |── release() ──────────────>  |                               |
  |   1100 ALPH → freelancer     |                               |
  |   (atomic, single tx)        |                               |
  |                              |                               |
  |   Trust score +5             |                               |
  |   Next bond reduced          |                               |
```

The client deposits payment. The freelancer deposits a bond. Both are locked in a smart contract that **neither party controls**. When the client validates the work, everything is released in a **single atomic transaction** — payment + bond go to the freelancer. One click. One transaction. Zero risk of partial execution.

If there's a dispute, an on-chain arbiter reviews the evidence (specs, deliverables, messages — all stored on IPFS) and redistributes funds by percentage. Every decision is recorded on-chain. Transparent. Immutable. Auditable.

**No scenario leaves anyone stuck:**

| Situation | What happens |
|-----------|-------------|
| Client validates | Freelancer gets payment + bond. Score +5. |
| Client disappears | Auto-claim after 48h past deadline. Freelancer gets everything. |
| Client cancels early | Full refund before freelancer accepts. No penalty. |
| Freelancer abandons | Client refunded. Freelancer gets bond back. Score -3. |
| Dispute | Arbiter splits funds 0–100% with on-chain justification. |

---

## On-chain Reputation

Today, to be credible as a freelancer, you give 15% of your income to a platform. On Trove, **you build your own credibility. And nobody can take it away.**

The TrustRegistry contract stores every freelancer's trust score on-chain (0–100, starting at 50). The bond decreases as the score increases:

| Score | Bond | What it means |
|-------|------|---------------|
| 50 (new) | 50% of base | First gig. Unknown track record. |
| 70 | 30% | Proven. Several successful deliveries. |
| 90+ | 10% (floor) | Veteran. Minimal bond, maximum trust. |

Formula: `bond = baseCollateral * max(10, 100 - score) / 100`

A new freelancer deposits a full bond. After 5 missions, it drops. After 20, it's almost symbolic. They didn't send a resume. They didn't beg a platform to verify them. They just did the work — and the blockchain remembered.

---

## Why Alephium

We didn't pick Alephium by accident.

| | Ethereum | Alephium |
|---|---|---|
| **Model** | Account-based. All contracts share global state. | **sUTXO**. Each escrow is an isolated UTXO with its own state. |
| **Isolation** | One bug can contaminate other contracts. Like all bank vaults sharing one lock. | Each vault has its own lock, its own key. Mathematically isolated. |
| **Atomicity** | Multi-step transactions. Intermediate states. Race conditions. | Multiple inputs → one output → one transaction. **All or nothing.** |
| **Security** | Reentrancy. Unlimited token approvals. Flashloans. | **Impossible by design.** The Asset Permission System eliminates these attack vectors at the VM level. |
| **Energy** | PoW / PoS | Proof of Less Work. **87% less energy** than classic PoW. |

Alephium's sUTXO model lets us build **Smart-UTXOs** — assets that carry their own release conditions. The escrow contract IS the vault. Not a pointer to a balance in a global ledger. The actual funds, locked, with code that defines exactly when and how they move.

This is the level of security that freelancers deserve.

---

## Architecture

### Smart Contracts (Ralph)

**`TrustRegistry`** — Persistent on-chain reputation. One instance, stores all scores.

**`Escrow`** — One per mission. 13 fields, 8 functions, full dispute lifecycle.

```
Created ──> Active ──> Delivered ──> Done (release / autoClaim)
   |           |  |         |
   |           |  |         └──> Dispute ──> Done (resolve)
   |           |  |
   |           |  └──> Done (refundByFreelancer)
   |           |
   |           └──> Dispute ──> Done (resolve)
   |
   └──> Done (cancelByClient)
```

**9 TxScripts** — Alephium's native transaction scripts for frontend interaction:
`AcceptAndDeposit` · `Deliver` · `ReleasePayment` · `OpenDispute` · `SubmitEvidence` · `ResolveDispute` · `RefundByFreelancer` · `CancelEscrow` · `ClaimAfterDeadline`

### Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|-------|------------|
| Blockchain | Alephium (sUTXO, Proof of Less Work) |
| Smart contracts | Ralph (.ral) |
| Frontend | Next.js 14 · React 18 · TypeScript |
| Wallet | Alephium Extension (@alephium/web3-react) |
| Specs storage | IPFS via Pinata |
| SDK | @alephium/web3 · @alephium/cli |
| Tests | Jest · @alephium/web3-test |
| Infra | Docker Compose (node + explorer + PostgreSQL) |

### Monorepo

```
trove/
├── contracts/            # Ralph contracts + deploy scripts + tests
│   ├── contracts/        # escrow.ral · trust_registry.ral · escrow_scripts.ral
│   ├── scripts/          # Deploy scripts (TrustRegistry, then Escrow)
│   ├── test/             # Unit tests
│   └── artifacts/        # Auto-generated TypeScript bindings
├── app/                  # Next.js frontend
│   ├── src/components/   # CreateEscrow · ContractView · ArbitrationView
│   └── src/utils/        # Alephium web3 integration
├── alephium-stack/       # Docker Compose for local devnet
└── docs/                 # Technical documentation
```

---

## Run It

### Prerequisites

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) >= 18
- [Yarn](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/) v1 (`npm install -g yarn`)
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) + Docker Compose

### Setup

```bash
git clone <repo-url> && cd HackatonDeauphine
yarn install
cp app/.env.example app/.env.local
yarn go
```

> **Note on `.env.example`:** Yes, we know you're not supposed to commit API keys in a repo. These are shared Pinata (IPFS) credentials for the hackathon — they're free-tier, non-sensitive, and it saves reviewers from setting up their own. Don't do this in production.

`yarn go` starts the Docker devnet, compiles Ralph contracts, deploys them, builds TypeScript bindings, and launches the frontend. Everything.

**http://localhost:3000** — you're live.

### Testnet

```bash
export PRIVATE_KEYS="your_private_key"
yarn go:testnet
```

Free tokens: [Alephium Faucet](https://faucet.testnet.alephium.org/)

### Commands

| Command | What it does |
|---------|-------------|
| `yarn go` | Full stack: devnet + compile + deploy + build + frontend |
| `yarn go:testnet` | Same, but deploys to testnet |
| `yarn dev:testnet` | Frontend on testnet (contracts already deployed) |
| `yarn devnet:start` | Start Docker devnet |
| `yarn devnet:stop` | Stop Docker devnet |
| `yarn compile` | Compile Ralph → artifacts |
| `yarn deploy` | Deploy contracts to devnet |
| `yarn build:contracts` | Build TypeScript bindings |
| `yarn test` | Run unit tests |
| `yarn dev` | Start frontend (port 3000) |

### Devnet services

| Service | URL |
|---------|-----|
| Alephium Node | http://127.0.0.1:22973 |
| API Docs | http://127.0.0.1:22973/docs |
| Block Explorer | http://localhost:23000 |

### Devnet wallet

Import into [Alephium Extension](https://alephium.org/#wallets) (custom network `http://127.0.0.1:22973`):

```
vault alarm sad mass witness property virus style good flower rice alpha viable evidence run glare pretty scout evil judge enroll refuse another lava
```

4 addresses, **4,000,000 ALPH** each.

---

## Troubleshooting

| Problem | Fix |
|---------|-----|
| `ENOENT` on artifacts | `rm contracts/.project.json && yarn compile` |
| `Can't resolve 'my-contracts'` | `yarn build:contracts && yarn install` |
| Deploy fails (connection) | `yarn devnet:start` |
| Empty addresses in frontend | `yarn setup && yarn dev` |
| Port already in use | `yarn devnet:stop` |

---

## Docs

- [**Contract API**](docs/CONTRACTS_API.md) — Every function, every parameter, every check
- [**Frontend Guide**](docs/FRONTEND_GUIDE.md) — How to talk to the contracts from React
- [**Alephium Onboarding**](docs/ALEPHIUM-TECHNICAL-ONBOARDING.md) — Ralph language & sUTXO model
- [**Implementation Plan**](PLAN.md) — Design decisions & architecture rationale

---

## License

MIT
